1. SLAS Technol. 2025 Apr 17:100295. doi: 10.1016/j.slast.2025.100295. Online
ahead  of print.

NLP for Computational Insights into Nutritional Impacts on Colorectal Cancer 
Care.

Gong S(1), Jin X(2), Guo Y(3), Yu J(4).

Author information:
(1)The Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong University, Nantong, 
Jiangsu, 226001, China. Electronic address: gsn6574172@163.com.
(2)The Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu, 226001, 
China. Electronic address: 1554319715@qq.com.
(3)Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu, 226001, China. Electronic address: 
jyg@ntu.edu.cn.
(4)Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu, 226001, China. Electronic address: 
1014147829@qq.com.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prominent cancers globally, with its 
incidence rising among younger adults due to improved screening practices. 
However, existing algorithms for CRC prediction are frequently trained on 
datasets that primarily reflect older persons, thus limiting their usefulness in 
more diverse populations. Additionally, the part of nutrition in CRC deterrence 
and management is gaining significant attention, although computational 
approaches to analyzing the impact of diet on CRC remain underdeveloped. This 
research introduces the Nutritional Impact on CRC Prediction Framework 
(NICRP-Framework), which combines Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques 
with Adaptive Tunicate Swarm Optimized Large Language Models (ATSO-LLMs) to 
present important insights into the part of the diet in CRC care across diverse 
populations. The colorectal cancer dietary and lifestyle dataset, encompassing 
more than 1000 participants, is collected from multiple regions and sources. The 
dataset includes structured and unstructured data, including textual 
descriptions of food ingredients. These descriptions are processed using 
standardization techniques, such as stop word removal, lowercasing, and 
punctuation elimination. Relevant terms are then extracted and visualized in a 
word cloud. The dataset also contained an imbalanced binary CRC outcome, which 
is rebalanced utilizing the random oversampling. ATSO-LLMs are employed to 
analyze the processed dietary data, identifying key nutritional factors and 
forecasting CRC and non-CRC phenotypes based on dietary patterns. The results 
show that combining NLP-derived features with ATSO-LLMs significantly enhances 
prediction accuracy (98.4%), sensitivity (97.6%) specificity (96.9%) and 
F1-Score (96.2%), with minimal misclassification rates. This framework 
represents a transformative advancement in life science by offering a new, 
data-driven approach to understanding the nutritional determinants of CRC, 
empowering healthcare professionals to make more precise predictions and adapted 
dietary interventions for diverse populations.

Copyright Â© 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.slast.2025.100295
PMID: 40252975

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.