1. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2025 Mar 24:S0266-4356(25)00059-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.bjoms.2025.03.006. Online ahead of print.

The impact of the large language model ChatGPT in oral and maxillofacial 
surgery: a systematic review.

de Menezes Torres LM(1), de Morais EF(2), Fernandes Almeida DRM(3), Pagotto 
LEC(4), de Santana Santos T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Universidade de Pernambuco, 
Recife, PE, Brazil.
(2)Department of Oral Diagnosis, and Graduate Program in Oral Biology, 
Piracicaba Dental School, University of Campinas, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil. 
Electronic address: evertonfreitas2@hotmail.com.
(3)School of Dentistry, Federal University of Alfenas (Unifal-MG), Alfenas, 
Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon, Hospital Sírio-Libanes, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Institute Maxillofacial Education, Aracaju, Sergipe, Brazil.

This systematic review evaluates the impact of the large language model (LLM) 
ChatGPT in oral and maxillofacial surgery. Following PRISMA guidelines and 
registered in PROSPERO (CRD42024625882), the study involved a comprehensive 
search across PubMed/Medline, Embase, Scopus, and Science Direct. Inclusion 
criteria focused on ChatGPT's use in clinical decision-making, surgical 
planning, patient education, and research. Ten studies were reviewed, assessing 
ChatGPT's performance in diagnostic accuracy, surgical efficiency, and patient 
satisfaction. GPT-4 achieved the highest accuracy (76.8%) in multiple-choice 
questions but showed variability, with lower performance in pharmacology and 
complex clinical scenarios. It excelled in generating informed consent 
documents, outperforming other AI models and human residents in accuracy, 
completeness, and readability. It also provided accurate and supportive 
responses in postoperative follow up. However, limitations were noted in 
handling complex clinical decisions and providing personalised advice for cases 
such as oral cancer and orthognathic surgery. While ChatGPT shows potential in 
improving patient communication, reducing healthcare workloads, and providing 
up-to-date information, its current limitations in accuracy and personalisation 
underscore the need for human supervision and integration with clinical 
databases. AI tools like ChatGPT can complement, but should not replace, human 
judgment in specialised fields such as oral and maxillofacial surgery.

Copyright © 2025 The British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. 
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bjoms.2025.03.006
PMID: 40251084