1. Adv Simul (Lond). 2025 Apr 18;10(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s41077-025-00350-6.

Artificial intelligence-assisted academic writing: recommendations for ethical 
use.

Cheng A(1), Calhoun A(2), Reedy G(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Emergency Medicine, Alberta Children's 
Hospital, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, 28 Oki Drive NW, 
Calgary, Alberta, T3B 6A8, Canada. chenger@me.com.
(2)University of Louisville School of Medicine and Norton Children's Medical 
Group, Louisville, KY, USA.
(3)Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, London, UK.

Generative artificial intelligence (AI) tools have been selectively adopted 
across the academic community to help researchers complete tasks in a more 
efficient manner. The widespread release of the Chat Generative Pre-trained 
Transformer (ChatGPT) platform in 2022 has made these tools more accessible to 
scholars around the world. Despite their tremendous potential, studies have 
uncovered that large language model (LLM)-based generative AI tools have issues 
with plagiarism, AI hallucinations, and inaccurate or fabricated references. 
This raises legitimate concern about the utility, accuracy, and integrity of AI 
when used to write academic manuscripts. Currently, there is little clear 
guidance for healthcare simulation scholars outlining the ways that generative 
AI could be used to legitimately support the production of academic literature. 
In this paper, we discuss how widely available, LLM-powered generative AI tools 
(e.g. ChatGPT) can help in the academic writing process. We first explore how 
academic publishers are positioning the use of generative AI tools and then 
describe potential issues with using these tools in the academic writing 
process. Finally, we discuss three categories of specific ways generative AI 
tools can be used in an ethically sound manner and offer four key principles 
that can help guide researchers to produce high-quality research outputs with 
the highest of academic integrity.

Â© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s41077-025-00350-6
PMCID: PMC12007126
PMID: 40251634

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not Applicable. Competing 
interests: Adam Cheng is an editorial board member and a former Associate Editor 
of the journal Simulation in Healthcare. Aaron Calhoun is Associate 
Editor-in-Chief and an editorial board member of the journal Simulation in 
Healthcare. Gabriel Reedy is Editor-in-Chief and an editorial board member of 
the journal Advances in Simulation.